---
layout: post
permalink: blog/blog11/
categories: [Data Science]
---

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*i_Q34RRfcGUsniN6RIxnuQ.gif)

<!--end_excerpt-->

# Interactive Data Visualization

## Creating interactive plots and widgets for Data Visualization using Python libraries such as: Plotly, Bokeh, nbinteract, etc...

### Data Visualization

Data Visualization is a really important step to perform when analyzing a
dataset. If performed accurately it can:

* Help us to gain a deep understanding of the dynamics underlying our dataset.
* Speed up the machine learning side of the analysis.
* Make easier for others to understand our dataset investigation.

In this article, I will introduce you to some of the most used Python
Visualization libraries using practical examples and fancy visualization
techniques/widgets. All the code I used for this article is available in this
[GitHub
repository](https://github.com/pierpaolo28/Data-Visualization/tree/master/Python%20Visualization%20Libraries).

### Matplotlib

Matplotlib is probably Python most known Data Visualization library. In this
example, I will walk you through how to create an animated GIF of a *PCA
variance plot*.

First of all, we have to load the [Iris
Dataset](https://www.kaggle.com/arshid/iris-flower-dataset) using Seaborn and
perform PCA. Successively, we plot 20 graphs of the *PCA variance plot* while
varying the angle of observation from the axis. In order to create the 3D PCA
result plot, I followed [The Python Graph
Gallery](https://python-graph-gallery.com/372-3d-pca-result/) as a reference.

<script src="https://gist.github.com/pierpaolo28/c0be78bfef4278fcc1ab6a972f9ba78d.js"></script>

Finally, we can generate a GIF from the 20 graphs we produced using the
following function.

<script src="https://gist.github.com/pierpaolo28/d5c0d6066d07a7bddb9260074246cce0.js"></script>

The result obtained should be the same as the one in Figure 1. This same
mechanism can be applied in many other applications such as: animated
distributions, contours, and [classification machine learning
models](https://pierpaolo28.github.io/Projects/project9.html).

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*CQql1Trl3_PO8YS198lRgQ.gif) <br>
<span class="figcaption_hack">Figure 1: PCA variance plot</span>

Another way to make animated graphs in Matplotlib can be to use the Matplotlib
Animation API. This API can allow as to make some simple animations and live
graphs. Some examples can be found
[here](https://github.com/pierpaolo28/Data-Visualization/blob/master/Matplotlib-Animations/Matplotlib%20Animation%20API.ipynb).


### Celluloid

Celluloid library can be used in order to make animations easier in Matplotlib.
This is done by creating a Camera aimed to take snapshots of a graph every time
one of its parameters changes. All these pictures are then momentarily stored
and combined together to generate an animation.

In the following example, a snapshot will be generated for every loop iteration
and the animation will be created using the *animate()* function.

<script src="https://gist.github.com/pierpaolo28/0d5fa332ed3ebb2cc27eaa3917b12a41.js"></script>

It is then also possible to store the generated animation as a GIF using
*ImageMagick*. The resulting animation is shown in Figure 2.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*50NZ4IGTE_13GMM0Tfc3Ww.gif) <br>
<span class="figcaption_hack">Figure 2: Celluloid Example</span>

### Plotly

Plotly is an open-source Python library built on plotly.js. Plotly is available
in two different modes: online and offline. Using this library we can make
unlimited offline mode charts and at maximum 25 charts using the online mode.
When installing Plotly, it is although necessary to register to their website
and get an API key to get started (instead of just using a *pip install* like
for any other libraries considered in this article).

In this post, I will now walk you through an example using the offline mode to
plot Tesla stock market High and Low prices over a wide span of period. The data
I used for this example can be found
[here](https://www.macrotrends.net/stocks/charts/TSLA/tesla/stock-price-history).

First of all, we need to import the required Plotly libraries.

Successively, I imported the dataset and preprocessed it in order to then
realize the final plot. In this case, I made sure the columns I wanted to use
for the plot were of the right data-type and the dates were in the format
(YYYY-MM-DD). To do so, I converted the High and Low prices columns to double
datatypes and the Date column to a string format. Successively I converted the
Date column from a DD/MM/YYYY format to YYYY/MM/DD and finally to YYYY-MM-DD.

<script src="https://gist.github.com/pierpaolo28/c794239b62b1d2bfc73785fc510a72bb.js"></script>

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*d4qKDbH2CkuVxUK93LhK2g.png) <br>
<span class="figcaption_hack">Figure 3: Tesla Dataset</span>

Ultimately, I used the Plotly library to produce a Time Series chart of Tesla’s
stock market High and Low prices. Thanks to Plotly, this graph will be
interactive. Placing the cursor on any point of the time series we can get the
High and Low prices and using either the buttons or the slider we can decide on
which timeframe we want to focus on.

<script src="https://gist.github.com/pierpaolo28/bcbfc53a206d495f8e2fee6a3ac8dad1.js"></script>

In Figure 4 is shown the final result. Plotly documentation offers a wide range
of examples on how to make the best out of this library, some of these can be
found [here](https://plot.ly/python/).

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1200/1*tuxsRDgRqi3egugsgjF_qQ.gif) <br>
<span class="figcaption_hack">Figure 4: Plotly Example</span>

### Bokeh

Bokeh library is available for both Python and JavaScript. Most of its graphs,
interaction and widgets can be implemented just using Python but in some cases
might be necessary to use also Javascript.

When using Bokeh, graphs are built by stacking one layer on top of another. We
first start by creating a figure and then we add elements on it (Glyphs).
Depending on the plot we are trying to make, Glyphs can be of any form and shape
(eg. lines, bars, circles).

When creating plots using Boker, some tools get automatically generated along
with the plot. These are: a reference link to the Bokeh documentation, a pan, a
box zoom, a wheel zoom, a save option and a reset graph button (same as Plotly).

As a practical example, I will now walk through how to make an interactive time
series plot using the same dataset used in the Plotly example.

For this demonstration, will be plotted four different time series
(High/Low/Open and Close Price) and will be created four checkboxes. In this
way, the user will have the option to check/uncheck the boxes to make any of the
four-time series disappear from the graph.

In this example, in order to implement the checkboxes functionalities,
Javascript was used instead of Python.

<script src="https://gist.github.com/pierpaolo28/bb48aa368bb702caaab7caf23e6d442e.js"></script>

The resulting plot is shown in Figure 5.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1200/1*CUHPeX-cwscLGdxaa2xiuA.gif) <br>
<span class="figcaption_hack">Figure 5: Bokeh Demonstration</span>

As shown in the code above, the plot has additionally been saved as an HTML
file. This same option can be applied to Plotly graphs as well. If you are
interested to test yourself the plots realized with Plotly and Bokeh, they are
available [here](https://pierpaolo28.github.io/Projects/project11.html).

Both Plotly and Bokeh can be additionally used as dashboard frameworks for
Python, creating quite astonishing results [1, 2].

### Seaborn

Seaborn is a Python library built upon Matplotlib used to make statistical
graphs. According to Seaborn’s official website:

> If Matplotlib “tries to make easy things easy and hard things possible”, Seaborn
> tries to make a well-defined set of hard things easy too.

I will now walk you through a simple example using Seaborn. If you are looking
to find out more about this library, [Seaborn example
gallery](https://seaborn.pydata.org/examples/index.html) is a great place where
to start.

In the following example, I first loaded the [Iris
Dataset](https://www.kaggle.com/arshid/iris-flower-dataset) using Seaborn and
then created a pair-plot.

<script src="https://gist.github.com/pierpaolo28/1f04e18bcaba0cc25912d7b7e82490cd.js"></script>

A pair-plot is a function able to provide a graphical summary of the variable
pairs in a dataset. This is done by using scatterplots and a univariate
distribution representation of the matrix diagonal. In Figure 6 are shown the
results of this analysis.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*VWb19W_F8lbMd2iKIMsZaQ.png) <br>
<span class="figcaption_hack">Figure 6: Seaborn Pair-plot</span>

### nbinteract

nbinteract enables us to create interactive widgets in Jupiter Notebook. These
widgets can also be exported in HTML if wanted. An example of an online
implementation of nbinteract can be found
[here](https://pierpaolo28.github.io/Projects/interactivewidgets.html).

As a simple implementation here will be created a drop-down menu. Changing the
selection of the number of cars or the name of the owner will update in
real-time the string (Figure 7).

<script src="https://gist.github.com/pierpaolo28/45b66b7110ae9c238d5a6fef3682d15e.js"></script>

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*O66eeY3PjAEqnIrkTyYhdA.gif) <br>
<span class="figcaption_hack">Figure 7: NBInteract Example</span>

Moving from Python 3.9 onwards, [Jupyter Widgets](https://ipywidgets.readthedocs.io/en/stable/index.html) might provide better support for out of the box widget consumption in Notebook based environments.

### Additional Libraries

In addition to the libraries already mentioned, also
[Pygal](http://pygal.org/en/stable/documentation/index.html) and
[Altair](https://altair-viz.github.io/gallery/index.html) are other two Python
libraries commonly used. They both provide similar kind of plots to the ones
shown before, but can additionally be used to create other forms of plots such
as: Pyramids, Treemaps, Maps and Gantt Charts.

### Bibliography

[1] Bokeh — Gallery, Server App Examples. Accessed at:
[https://bokeh.pydata.org/en/latest/docs/gallery.html](https://bokeh.pydata.org/en/latest/docs/gallery.html)

[2] Plotly — Dash App Gallery. Accessed at:
[https://dash-gallery.plotly.host/Portal/](https://dash-gallery.plotly.host/Portal/)
